add initial draft of language specification (#3618)
onflow/cadence: docs/lang_spec/Cadence Language Specification.md

# Cadence Language Specification

**THIS IS THE START OF A SPECIFICATION**
**: It is incomplete and may contain many errors.**

> 

Reviewer: It might be good to break this document down into multiple files, as it is already very large, which makes it difficult to review (GitHub is already slowing down 😅)

Reviewer 2: Agree. Given that markdown doesn't support a way of embedding content from a different file, maybe we can still have them on separate files, but combine them later using a third-party tool, and generate the "single-file version" automatically (for example, during the build).

Reviewer: Yeah, not having a single file at the beginning is OK, making it easier to write is more important.
For now we can just use the Markdown links to link to other files.

I had quick look around regarding tools, some ideas:
- Do nothing / don't generate anything from the Markdown files and keep them as is. Content can be viewed on GitHub, which has page previews
- Use [Docusaurus](https://docusaurus.io), just like we use for the website/documentation on https://cadence-lang.org / https://github.com/onflow/cadence-lang.org. We might also just move or build the spec there. There seem to be plugins to generate PDF
- The [Kotlin Spec](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlin-spec/) uses a pre-processor, https://logological.org/gpp, to stitch the files together, and [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/) to generate HTML and PDF. See e.g. https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlin-spec/blob/release/docs/scripts/build/buildPdf.sh and https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlin-spec/blob/release/docs/scripts/build/buildHtml.sh

## I. Introduction

### 1. Purpose of the Specification

> The purpose of this specification is to provide a formal and comprehensive definition of the Cadence programming language. Cadence is specifically designed for writing smart contracts and decentralized applications (dApps) on the Flow blockchain. This document serves as an authoritative guide for the language's syntax, semantics, type system, and execution model, ensuring consistent implementation and usage across the Flow ecosystem.

Reviewer: Cadence is not Flow-specific, but a general smart contract language

```suggestion
The purpose of this specification is to provide a formal and comprehensive definition of the Cadence programming language. Cadence is specifically designed for writing smart contracts and decentralized applications (dApps) on the blockchains. This document serves as an authoritative guide for the language's syntax, semantics, type system, and execution model, ensuring consistent implementations.
```

Please also correct this in the remainder of the section

Author: Updated.

The primary goals of this specification are to:
- Provide an unambiguous description of Cadence's structure and behavior.
- Facilitate the development of tooling, such as compilers, interpreters, and debuggers, that conform to the same standards.
- Support developers in writing secure, efficient, and maintainable smart contracts.
- Guide the evolution of Cadence by ensuring changes and new features maintain compatibility and correctness within the language framework.

The intended audience of this specification includes:
- **Language Implementers**: Individuals or teams responsible for creating or maintaining Cadence compilers, interpreters, and other development tools.
- **Developers**: Software engineers writing smart contracts or dApps using Cadence on the Flow blockchain.
- **Tool Makers**: Developers building integrated development environments (IDEs), testing tools, and utilities that work with Cadence.

### 2. Overview of Cadence

> Cadence is a resource-oriented programming language that prioritizes safety, clarity, and developer experience in the context of blockchain development. Designed by Flow Foundation, Cadence enables secure and scalable development of smart contracts, particularly for applications involving digital assets such as non-fungible tokens (NFTs) and decentralized finance (DeFi) protocols.
> 
> The primary design philosophy behind Cadence is **resource-oriented programming**, which introduces the concept of resources as first-class citizens. Resources represent digital assets that are protected by strict rules ensuring that they cannot be accidentally duplicated or lost. By enforcing ownership and access control at the language level, Cadence minimizes many common security vulnerabilities found in blockchain programming.
> 
> Cadence is the core language for smart contracts on the Flow blockchain, a platform built to support high-performance dApps for mainstream adoption. Flow's account-based model, combined with Cadence's strong typing and resource management features, provides a secure and user-friendly environment for developers to create complex decentralized applications.
> 
> In comparison to other blockchain languages like Solidity (used on Ethereum), Cadence emphasizes **safety** and **developer ergonomics**. While Solidity relies on more traditional programming paradigms, Cadence’s resource-oriented model provides built-in safeguards against common issues like unintended re-entrancy or resource mismanagement, making it especially suitable for managing valuable digital assets.

Reviewer: Great idea to point out the design philosophy and goals.

The context of Cadence having been designed and built as part of Flow, as well as comparisons to other languages, are not really relevant in the language specification, maybe rephrase and remove:

```suggestion
Cadence is a resource-oriented programming language that prioritizes safety, clarity, and developer experience in the context of blockchain development. Cadence aims to allow for secure and scalable development of smart contracts, particularly for applications involving digital assets such as non-fungible tokens (NFTs) and decentralized finance (DeFi) protocols.

The primary design philosophy behind Cadence is **resource-oriented programming**, which introduces the concept of resources as first-class citizens. Resources represent digital assets that are protected by strict rules ensuring that they cannot be accidentally duplicated or lost. By enforcing ownership and access control at the language level, Cadence minimizes many common security vulnerabilities found in blockchain programming.
```

### 3. Scope
This specification covers the complete formal definition of the Cadence programming language, including:
- **Lexical Structure**: The basic building blocks of the language, such as tokens, identifiers, and literals.
- **Syntax and Grammar**: The rules governing the structure of Cadence programs, including statements, expressions, and declarations.
- **Type System**: The various data types supported by Cadence, including primitives, resources, structs, and optionals.
- **Resource Management**: The ownership and lifecycle of resources, ensuring they cannot be copied or deleted incorrectly.

> - **Execution Model**: The runtime behavior of Cadence programs, including how contracts are executed and transactions are processed.

Reviewer: This is great

> This specification does not cover:
> - **Flow Blockchain Consensus Protocol**: The underlying mechanisms of the Flow blockchain, including its consensus algorithm and network architecture.
> - **Flow-Specific APIs and Services**: Detailed descriptions of APIs or services that interact with the blockchain but are external to the core Cadence language.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## II. Lexical Structure

The lexical structure of Cadence defines the basic building blocks from which Cadence programs are constructed. This section outlines the set of characters allowed in Cadence, how identifiers are named, the use of keywords, literals, and comments.

---

### 1. Character Set

Cadence source code is written using the **Unicode** character set (UTF-8 encoding), which allows for a wide range of characters from various languages. However, the core lexical elements, such as identifiers, operators, and punctuation, are primarily restricted to the ASCII subset of Unicode.

- **Allowed Characters**: 
  - Letters (a-z, A-Z)
  - Digits (0-9)

>   - Special symbols used in operators and syntax, such as `+`, `-`, `*`, `/`, `=`, `{`, `}`, `(`, `)`, `[`, `]`, etc.

Author: I will reconcile this with what I find in the compiler, and include all symbols and characters used in the language.

  - Whitespace characters: space (`U+0020`), tab (`U+0009`), newline (`U+000A`), and carriage return (`U+000D`).

- **Unicode Support**:
  - While the core syntax is based on ASCII characters, Unicode is fully supported in **string literals** and **comments**.

>   - Identifiers may include Unicode characters in the ranges of letters and numbers but should generally follow best practices for naming and clarity.

Author: I agree. There are things included in this first draft that I now believe belong somewhere else.

---

### 2. Identifiers

> Identifiers in Cadence are used to name **variables**, **constants**, **functions**, **contracts**, **types**, and other user-defined entities. Identifiers must follow specific rules to ensure consistency and avoid conflicts with reserved keywords.

Reviewer: Contracts are also types, maybe remove. Just like above, we want to be exhaustive/specific, so also remove the remainder of the sentence.

```suggestion
Identifiers in Cadence are used to name **variables**, **constants**, **functions**, and **types**. Identifiers must follow specific rules to ensure consistency and avoid conflicts with reserved keywords.
```

Author: Updated.

Reviewer: @jsproz Can you please push the update? So far the PR only has one commit. Thanks!

> - **Rules for Naming Identifiers**:

Reviewer: It might make sense to give the EBNF notation here

Reviewer 2: I also thought the same

Author: I will update the grammar notation now that I have a grammar that will parser most files. I plan to use a modified EBNF style notation. There will need to be a new section at the top to explain it.

  - Identifiers must start with a **letter** (either uppercase or lowercase) or an **underscore (`_`)**. 
  - After the first character, identifiers may contain **letters**, **digits (0-9)**, or underscores (`_`).
  - Example: `balance`, `transactionFee`, `_internalState`.

- **Case Sensitivity**: 
  - Identifiers in Cadence are **case-sensitive**. For example, `Token` and `token` are treated as distinct identifiers.

- **Valid Characters**:
  - Identifiers can include ASCII letters (`A-Z`, `a-z`), digits (`0-9`), and underscores (`_`).

>   - Identifiers cannot contain spaces or special characters like `!`, `@`, `#`, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Identifiers cannot contain other characters, like spaces or special characters like `!`, `@`, `#`, etc.
```

Author: Updated.

> - **Special Identifiers**:
>   - Identifiers starting with an underscore (`_`) are typically used for private or internal entities. Although allowed, their use should follow common programming conventions.

Reviewer: This is mostly code style and not really part of the language specification

```suggestion
```

---

> ### 3. Keywords and Reserved Words

Reviewer: Maybe also make the distinction between hard and soft keywords here, see https://github.com/onflow/cadence/blob/master/parser/keyword.go, and note this in the identifier section above.

Cadence has a set of **keywords** that are reserved for special syntactic purposes. These keywords cannot be used as identifiers in programs, as they have predefined meanings in the language.

- **Keywords**:

>   - `access`, `as`, `attachment`, `auth`, `break`, `case`, `catch`, `const`, `continue`, `contract`, `create`, `default`, `destroy`, `else`, `emit`, `entitlement`, `enum`, `event`, `execute`, `export`, `false`, `final`, `finally`, `for`, `fun`, `goto`, `guard`, `if`, `import`, `in`, `include`, `init`, `interface`, `internal`, `is`, `let`, `mapping`, `move`, `native`, `nil`, `post`, `pre`, `prepare`, `priv`, `pub`, `repeat`, `require`, `requires`, `resource`, `result`, `return`, `self`, `static`, `struct`, `switch`, `throw`, `throws`, `transaction`, `true`, `try`, `typealias`, `var`, `where`, `while`.

Reviewer: `pub` and `priv` got removed. Maybe update the list of keywords in the current parser. There's also the internal `info` command which can dump the hard keywords: `go run ./cmd/info dump-hard-keyword`

Author: Useful tool! `pub` and `priv` are still dumped. Should we removed them? Or are they useful for backwards compatibility?

- **Array Literals**:
  - **TODO**

- **Dictionary Literals**:
  - **TODO**

---

### 5. Comments

Comments in Cadence are non-executable sections of the code that can be used for documentation, explanation, or temporarily disabling code. Cadence supports two types of comments:

- **Single-line Comments**:
  - Single-line comments start with `//` and continue until the end of the line.
  - Example: 
    ```cadence
    // This is a single-line comment
    let value = 42  // This is also a single-line comment
    ```

- **Multi-line Comments**:
  - Multi-line comments start with `/*` and end with `*/`. They can span multiple lines and can be nested.
  - Example:
    ```cadence
    /* This is a 
       multi-line comment */
    ```

  - **Nested Comments**:
    - Cadence allows multi-line comments to be nested, which means you can comment out blocks of code that contain multi-line comments without causing errors.
    - Example:
      ```cadence
      /* This is a multi-line comment 
         /* This is a nested comment */ 
         Ending the outer comment */
      ```

---

> This lexical structure ensures a clear and consistent foundation for writing Cadence programs, supporting both readability and maintainability across a variety of use cases within the Flow blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This lexical structure ensures a clear and consistent foundation for writing Cadence programs, supporting both readability and maintainability.
```

Author: Updated.

> ## III. Syntax and Grammar

Reviewer: If we structure the specification in terms of layers, like all features in terms of syntax, than all features in terms of semantics, etc. it might make sense to explain the purpose of a feature in one section. 

For example, when describing the syntax for a struct declaration, we could  only focus on the syntax, and defer the explanation and purpose for the feature to another section (semantics?), e.g. "the syntax ... introduces a struct declaration", where "struct declaration" links to the section explaining the feature and semantics for structs.

The syntax and grammar of Cadence define the formal structure of programs written in the language. This section outlines the key elements that make up Cadence programs, including how contracts, interfaces, functions, variables, and statements are declared and used, as well as the rules governing expressions and control flow.

---

### 1. Program Structure

> A Cadence program is composed of a combination of **contracts**, **interfaces**, **transactions**, and **scripts**. These building blocks allow developers to create decentralized applications that interact with the Flow blockchain.

Reviewer: Scripts are just a conceptual feature of the Flow blockchain, but not a dedicated language feature, so maybe remove it here and below.

In general, Cadence programs consist of zero or more declarations. However, there are three "kinds" of programs / conventions for programs:
- Contracts and contract interfaces: Only have a single contract or contract declaration at the top-level. Persistent, deployed to the blockchain
- Transactions: Only have a single transaction declaration at the top-level. Ephemeral, submitted to the blockchain to perform read/write operations
- Scripts: Only have a single function declaration at the top-level, named `main`.

Maybe merge this explanation of the structure with the purposes below

Author: Scripts have been removed from this.

- **Contracts**: Define the structure and behavior of reusable modules that manage state and execute business logic on the blockchain.
- **Interfaces**: Declare abstract behavior that contracts or other types can implement, supporting both static and dynamic contracts.
- **Transactions**: Define the operations that modify the blockchain state and handle interactions between accounts.

> - **Scripts**: Read-only code used to query data from the blockchain without modifying its state.

Reviewer: See above

```suggestion
```

Author: Scripts have been removed from this.

Each Cadence program must specify its purpose within the structure defined above, allowing for secure interactions with the blockchain.

- **EBNF**:
  ```ebnf
  program
    : ( declaration ';'? )* EOF
    ;
  ```

---

### 2. Declarations

> In Cadence, declarations form the backbone of a program, enabling the definition of data structures, resources, contracts, functions, variables, events, and other key components. A declaration defines the type and scope of these components, laying out how they interact with each other within the program. Cadence’s declaration model is designed to be clear and explicit, ensuring that every element in a program is well-typed, properly scoped, and initialized according to strict language rules.

Reviewer: Not all declarations define types. Maybe specify what each declaration declares

Cadence is a resource-oriented programming language, and the declaration system reflects its focus on security and ownership. Resources, which are unique and must be used exactly once, are declared and managed alongside more traditional constructs like structs and functions. This approach ensures that programs written in Cadence follow safe patterns for managing digital assets, preventing duplication and loss while supporting complex, scalable applications.

> The Declarations section introduces the grammar and syntax for various types of declarations in Cadence. From basic data structures such as structs and variables, to more complex entities like contracts and entitlement mappings, this section covers the formal rules for creating and using these elements within the language. Each declaration type is defined using Cadence’s specific Extended Backus-Naur Form (EBNF), providing a precise specification for developers and implementers to follow.

Reviewer: Maybe use a "kinds of declarations" / "declaration kind" instead of "types of declarations", because "type" might be misunderstood to mean _type_. See also the implementation, where this naming is used to avoid ambiguity/mistakes

Author: I agree. This has been updated.

      
      init(parameterName: Type) {
        // Initialization of fields
        self.constantField = parameterValue
        self.variableField = anotherValue
      }
      
      fun someFunction() {
        // Function body
      }
    }

    ```
    - **access**: Specifies the access control for the struct and its members (e.g., pub, access(contract), access(self)).
    - **StructName**: The name of the struct.
    - **Fields**: Declared with the let or var keywords. Constant fields (let) are immutable after initialization, while variable fields (var) can be modified after the struct is created.
    - **Initializer**: The init function is responsible for initializing all fields in the struct. It ensures that each field is assigned a value before the struct is used.
    - **Functions**: Structs can contain functions, which operate on their fields and are defined within the struct body.

- **Example**:
  ```cadence
  pub struct User {
    pub let id: Int
    pub var name: String
    
    init(id: Int, name: String) {
      self.id = id
      self.name = name
    }
     
    pub fun updateName(newName: String) {
      self.name = newName
    }
  }

>   ```

Reviewer: Note that in Cadence 1.0 the access specifiers `pub`, `pub(set)` and `priv` got removed. See "pub and priv Access Modifiers Got Removed" in https://github.com/onflow/cadence/releases/tag/v1.0.0

Author: I plan to remove many of the examples. They may be better fitted to another document. I will definitely remove the ones that use `pub` and `priv`.

  - In this example, the User struct has a constant field id and a variable field name. The initializer sets both fields, and the updateName function allows modification of the name field after the struct is created.

- **EBNF**:
  - The formal EBNF for struct declarations in Cadence is as follows:
    ```ebnf
    structDeclaration
      : access 'struct' identifier conformances? '{' membersAndNestedDeclarations '}'
      ;
    
    membersAndNestedDeclarations
      : (fieldDeclaration | functionDeclaration | structDeclaration)*
      ;
  ```
    - **access**: The access control for the struct (e.g., pub for public, priv for private).
    - **identifier**: The name of the struct.
    - **conformances**: Optional interfaces the struct conforms to.

>     - **membersAndNestedDeclarations**: Defines the fields, functions, and nested structs within the struct.

Reviewer 2: More of a general proposal/suggestion on the grammar formatting: I think we could make those non-terminals in a production-rule to link to its definition. e.g: link `access` in the above production-rule to the section where access control's grammar is defined. Something [like this](https://gist.github.com/SupunS/3efb34060cf6cc43fa292e33cd51c839).
Unfortunately, this is not easy to get it working, would most probably need some post-processor to generate links, do formatting, etc.

But in the meantime, maybe extract those to separate sections (e.g: `access`, `conformance`, etc.), and remove it from here (can link later), as those can get repetitive.

#### Resource Declarations

In Cadence, a resource is a composite type designed to model unique, consumable assets that have strict ownership and usage constraints. Resources are linear types, meaning they must be used exactly once, and they cannot be copied, discarded, or implicitly shared. This behavior is particularly well-suited for managing valuable digital assets, such as tokens or other forms of ownership, where ensuring uniqueness and preventing accidental loss or duplication is critical.

Resources are declared using the resource keyword, followed by an identifier (the name of the resource), optional conformances to interfaces, and a block containing fields and functions that define the resource’s behavior. Like structs, the access level of a resource and its members is controlled by access modifiers, which dictate the visibility and accessibility of the resource’s elements.

- **Syntax**:
  - The basic syntax for a resource declaration is as follows:
    ```cadence

>     access(resource) resource ResourceName {

Reviewer: `access(resource)` is not a valid access modifier. See the implementation for a valid list: https://github.com/onflow/cadence/blob/master/ast/access.go

    ```cadence
    let a = 10
    a = 15  // Invalid: Constants cannot be reassigned
    ```
  - **Variables (var)**: Variables allow for reassignment, meaning the identifier can be bound to a different value after initialization.
    ```cadence
    var b = 20
    b = 30  // Valid: Variables can be reassigned
    ```

- **Initialization Requirement**:
  - All variable declarations in Cadence must be initialized with a value at the time of declaration. It is invalid to declare a variable or constant without an initial value.
    ```cadence
   // Invalid: Declaring a constant without initialization
   let x  // This will result in an error
    ```

- **Type Inference and Type Annotations**:
  - Cadence allows for type inference, meaning that the type of a variable or constant can be automatically determined based on the initial value. However, you can also explicitly specify a type annotation to declare the type of the variable or constant.
    ```cadence
    // Type inference: Cadence infers that `a` is of type Int
    let a = 10
    
    // Explicit type annotation: `b` is explicitly declared as Int
    let b: Int = 20
    ```

> - **Unique Identifiers**:

Reviewer: Maybe describe this as "shadowing"

  - Each identifier in a scope must be unique. Declaring another variable or constant with the same name within the same scope is not allowed, regardless of the declaration kind or type.
    ```cadence
    let x = 10
    
    // Invalid: Redeclaring a constant with the same name in the same scope
    let x = 20  // This will result in an error
    
    var y = 5
    
    // Invalid: Redeclaring a variable with the same name in the same scope
    var y = 10  // This will result in an error
    ```

> - **Redeclaration in Sub-scopes**:

Reviewer: Maybe reference scoping rules / and or move shadowing rules to scoping rules, given they are very closely related.

    - Example: `/storage/myToken`.
  
  - **`private`**: Data stored in `private` paths can only be accessed by the account itself or by authorized parties through **capabilities**. The `private` path is used for data that should not be exposed to the public but may be shared with specific contracts or users via capabilities.
    - Example: `/private/mySecretData`.

  - **`public`**: Data stored in `public` paths is accessible to anyone. Public storage is typically used for exposing data that other accounts or contracts may need to interact with, such as balances or public-facing information. Public paths do not expose the actual resource but rather provide references or capabilities to interact with the data.
    - Example: `/public/tokenBalance`.

- **Rules for Storing Resources and Data**:
  - Resources and data must be stored in well-defined paths under one of the storage categories (`storage`, `private`, or `public`). Resources are moved between accounts using explicit transactions and must be stored in the correct paths to ensure security and proper access control.

>   - Only the account owner can directly manipulate their `storage` paths. Public and private paths must use **capabilities** to grant or restrict access to external

Reviewer: Maybe mention here that Cadence uses lexical scoping (as opposed to e.g. dynamic scoping)
